Page 57:
characterize and catalogue alternative splicing and its
regulation.
IDENTIFICATION OF SPLICE
VARIANTS
While different tissues or cell types in an organism
have roughly the same genome, their transcriptomes
could be significantly different. The end goal of
alternative splicing annotation is to identify and
catalogue all mRNA transcripts in the cells of an
organism at various stages, together with relevant
information about their spatial and temporal expres-
sion and function. This is analogous to the gene
annotation problem that has been in the cross hairs
for the past two decades. Given the incomplete and
fragmented nature of the data and the insufficient
experimental characterization, this goal is currently
difficult to achieve, if not impossible (specific
challenges are listed in the forthcoming sections).
A variation that is more readily attainable and can
be just as powerful for practical purposes, such as
designing diagnostic markers that can be tested
in vitro via microarray and proteomic experiments
[26] or in silico [27] is that of identifying and
annotating splice forms, i.e. mutually exclusive
splicing patterns inferred from partial cDNA and/or
protein sequences, or exon-level alternative spli-
cing events. Of particular interest are exons or
combinations of exons that undergo different
splicing patterns.
Bioinformatics
Approaches for identifying full-length splice variants
or just splice forms typically involve the comparison
of two or more expressed DNA or protein sequences
of different isoforms to detect differences caused by
insertions or deletions of genetic material. Direct
comparison between the sequences of different
cDNA and protein isoforms (Figure 2a) reveals the
differences between the sequences compared, but
does not characterize them in the context of the
gene's structure. The observed difference can be an
exon, part of an exon, or a set of consecutive exons
and exon portions. In contrast, comparisons of
exon^intron structures from cDNA- or protein-
genomic spliced alignments clearly distinguish
among the types of alternative splicing events
(Figure 2b) and provide an extended genomic
context in which the nearby splicing regulatory
regions can be explored.
Sequence data
Computational approaches rely on cDNA and
protein sequences collected in large repositories in
GenBank and around the world. Database for
expressed sequence tags (dbEST) [28] contains
single-pass EST sequences from direct submissions
to GenBank. RefSeq [29] is an NCBI effort to
collect, review and curate full-length mRNA
sequences from submissions or gene prediction
projects. More recently, the Mammalian Gene
Collection (MGC) project [30] was started as an
NIH initiative to clone and sequence full-length
open reading frames (ORFs) for human, mouse and
rat genes. Protein sequences can be obtained from
databases such as SwissProt, TrEMBL and PIR,
currently united into the Universal Protein
Knowledgebase UniProt [31]. The quality and
characteristics of the data may differ significantly,
and thus in judging the potential for identified
differences to represent true alternative splicing
events considerations about the type, quality and
reliability of data are important.
Alignment tools
A number of specialized programs have been
developed to align cDNA sequences to genomic
sequences allowing for sequencing errors, poly-
morphisms and introns, such as EST_GENOME
[32], Sim4 [33], Spidey [34], and GeneSeqer [35].
These programs were designed specifically to
compare a cDNA with the restricted genomic
range encompassing the gene. With the availability
of whole genome sequences, new generation tools
were developed to efficiently map large cDNA data
sets to large chromosomal sequences and whole
genomes. Examples include Blat [36], ESTmapper
[37], MGAlignIt [38], and GMAP [39]. Given a
cDNA sequence, each of these programs generates a
spliced alignment of the cDNA and the genomic
sequence. The alignment clearly marks the locations
of exons and introns in the two sequences and gives
additional information about the match, such as the
predicted strand and alignment quality statistics.
Although all of these programs have reached a high
level of accuracy, challenges remain in dealing with
non-canonical splice junctions, high EST sequencing
error rates or specific types of sequencing errors,
detecting small exons and/or large introns, and
correctly determining the true location of the cDNA
on the genome 