Florea:

Page 55:
Bioinformatics of alternative splicing
and its regulation
Liliana Florea
Submitted: 3rd August 2005; Received (in revised form): 6th December 2005
Abstract
The sequencing of the human genome and ensuing wave of data generation have brought new light upon the extent
and importance of alternative splicing as an RNA regulatory mechanism. Alternative splicing could potentially
explain the complexity of protein repertoire during evolution, and defects in the splicing mechanism are responsible
for diseases as complex as cancer. Among the challenges that rise in light of these discoveries are cataloguing splice
variation in the human and other eukaryotic genomes, and identifying and characterizing the splicing regulatory
elements that control their expression. Bioinformatics efforts tackling these two questions are just at the beginning.
This article is a survey of these methods.
Keywords: alternative splicing; gene indices; genome-based clustering; splice graph; splicing enhancers; splicing silencers
INTRODUCTION
Alternative splicing of pre-mRNA has captured the
attention of the genomics community as an
important regulatory mechanism for modulating
the gene and protein content in the cell. The
discovery that many genes can produce multiple
mRNA and protein isoforms, through the regulated
selection of different combinations of exons for
inclusion into the mRNA, changed irreversibly the
outlook of many important genomics problems such
as the annotation of genes and their regulation, and
inspired hypotheses reaching far into the biomedical
and evolutionary biology areas.
The phenomenon of alternative splicing was
discovered in concept in the late 1970s [1], and
was then verified experimentally in the 1980s [2],
but the real revolution in alternative splicing
occurred about the time of the sequencing of the
human genome. The availability of large EST and
mRNA data sets stimulated large-scale analyses
which estimated that as many as 60% of the human
genes undergo alternative splicing to create multiple
transcript isoforms [3–5]. High levels of splicing
have been estimated in other mammals recently
sequenced, such as mouse and rat [6, 7]. Thus,
alternative splicing appears to be the rule rather than
the exception in gene expression. With the recent
slashing of the number of human genes down to
25 000 [8], scientists have turned to alternative
splicing as a mechanism to potentially explain how
a large variety of proteins can be achieved with a
relatively small number of genes [9], and ultimately
to explain the paradox between gene content and
the complexity of organisms. On a more immediate
timescale, errors in the splicing mechanism and its
regulation have been investigated as triggers in a
number of diseases, including cancers [10–12], and
such studies may lead to new tools for diagnostics
and treatment [13–15].
Alternative splicing is the process through which
different combinations of exons within a gene are
spliced from the RNA precursor to be included in
the mature mRNA depending upon the tissue,
developmental stage and disease versus normal
conditions of the cell. The resulting proteins may
exhibit different and sometimes antagonistic func-
tional and structural properties [13, 16], and may
inhabit the same cell with the resulting phenotype
being the balance between their expression levels
[17]. From a gene structure standpoint, alternative
splicing at internal exons manifests itself in four types

Page 56:
b.
c.
d.
e.
5′
f.
3′
Figure 1: Types of alternative splicing events: ( a). exon
inclusion/exclusion; (b). alternative 30 exon end; ( c).
alternative 50 exon end; ( d). intron retention; ( e). and
( f). 50 and 30 alternative untranslated regions (UTRs).
The schematic representation shows exons as boxes,
and introns as straight or segmented lines connecting
the exons. Alternatively spliced elements (exons or
portions of exons) are shown in dark grey, and those
constitutively spliced in light color.
of events, depicted in Figure 1a–d: exon inclusion
and/or exclusion, alternative 50 exon end, alternative
30 exon end, and intron retention. Alternative
50 and 30 untranslated regions (UTRs) are often
encountered (Figure 1e–f), but in general are harder
to identify and characterize due to noisy data and the
intrinsic difficulty in identifying the gene boundaries.
Consequently, they have not been reflected with the
same prevalence in bioinformatics methods and
literature.
The two most important reverberations of
alternative splicing in bioinformatics and computa-
tional biology are in the areas of gene annotation and
splicing regulation [18]. Traditionally, gene discov-
ery was accomplished with a combination of ab initio
and comparative methods designed to identify linear
exon–intron models of genes along a genomic
sequence [19]. Following the sequencing of the
human genome, large-scale annotation projects at
the major genomics centers (Ensembl [20], UCSC
Genome Browser database [21], Celera Genome
Browser and Otto annotation system [22]) typically
employed a variety of prediction methods to
produce 'evidence' for the gene, and used a 'combiner'
algorithm to consolidate the different lines of
evidence into a representative gene model. Lastly,
alternatively spliced forms were added to the
automated annotation by human curators in their
effort to improve the quality and completeness of
the data set. Such sets were tedious to create and
captured only partly the repertoire of splicing
variation. More recently, the gene annotation land-
scape has changed to incorporate alternatively spliced
transcripts or alternative splicing events as an integral
part of the annotation process. There has recently
been a concomitant increase in the number of
repositories containing and cataloguing alternative
splicing information.
Equally important is the question of what causes
and/or controls the variation in splicing. Unlike
transcriptional control exercised from the promoter,
which modulates exclusively the amount of gene
expression, the control of alternative splicing deter-
mines the abundance, structure and function of
transcripts and encoded proteins from a gene, and
can alter such salient properties of proteins as binding
affinity, intracellular localization, enzymatic activity,
stability and post-translational modifications [23].
Furthermore, exon selection in alternative splicing
can be tissue, developmental stage or disease specific
[13, 24], or can change in response to external
stimuli such as receptor stimulation, cellular stress or
changes in neuronal activity [25]. Thus, the regula-
tion of alternative splicing presents a more versatile
and finer granularity control than transcriptional
regulation.
Most of the splicing regulation that is not part of
the basal spliceosome function is known to be
undertaken by families of splicing regulatory pro-
teins. These splicing factors bind to signals in the
vicinity of the exon and promote the exon's
inclusion or exclusion by activating or inhibiting
the function of the splice site. The number of classes
and characteristics of these regulatory proteins and
their RNA binding sites are relatively little known
and are currently under active investigation.
In this article, we present an overview of
bioinformatics methods to date to identify, 