Florea:

Page 55:
Bioinformatics of alternative splicing
and its regulation
Liliana Florea
Submitted: 3rd August 2005; Received (in revised form): 6th December 2005
Abstract
The sequencing of the human genome and ensuing wave of data generation have brought new light upon the extent
and importance of alternative splicing as an RNA regulatory mechanism. Alternative splicing could potentially
explain the complexity of protein repertoire during evolution, and defects in the splicing mechanism are responsible
for diseases as complex as cancer. Among the challenges that rise in light of these discoveries are cataloguing splice
variation in the human and other eukaryotic genomes, and identifying and characterizing the splicing regulatory
elements that control their expression. Bioinformatics efforts tackling these two questions are just at the beginning.
This article is a survey of these methods.
Keywords: alternative splicing; gene indices; genome-based clustering; splice graph; splicing enhancers; splicing silencers
INTRODUCTION
Alternative splicing of pre-mRNA has captured the
attention of the genomics community as an
important regulatory mechanism for modulating
the gene and protein content in the cell. The
discovery that many genes can produce multiple
mRNA and protein isoforms, through the regulated
selection of different combinations of exons for
inclusion into the mRNA, changed irreversibly the
outlook of many important genomics problems such
as the annotation of genes and their regulation, and
inspired hypotheses reaching far into the biomedical
and evolutionary biology areas.
The phenomenon of alternative splicing was
discovered in concept in the late 1970s [1], and
was then verified experimentally in the 1980s [2],
but the real revolution in alternative splicing
occurred about the time of the sequencing of the
human genome. The availability of large EST and
mRNA data sets stimulated large-scale analyses
which estimated that as many as 60% of the human
genes undergo alternative splicing to create multiple
transcript isoforms [3–5]. High levels of splicing
have been estimated in other mammals recently
sequenced, such as mouse and rat [6, 7]. Thus,
alternative splicing appears to be the rule rather than
the exception in gene expression. With the recent
slashing of the number of human genes down to
25 000 [8], scientists have turned to alternative
splicing as a mechanism to potentially explain how
a large variety of proteins can be achieved with a
relatively small number of genes [9], and ultimately
to explain the paradox between gene content and
the complexity of organisms. On a more immediate
timescale, errors in the splicing mechanism and its
regulation have been investigated as triggers in a
number of diseases, including cancers [10–12], and
such studies may lead to new tools for diagnostics
and treatment [13–15].
Alternative splicing is the process through which
different combinations of exons within a gene are
spliced from the RNA precursor to be included in
the mature mRNA depending upon the tissue,
developmental stage and disease versus normal
conditions of the cell. The resulting proteins may
exhibit different and sometimes antagonistic func-
tional and structural properties [13, 16], and may
inhabit the same cell with the resulting phenotype
being the balance between their expression levels
[17]. From a gene structure standpoint, alternative
splicing at internal exons manifests itself in four types

Page 56:
b.
c.
d.
e.
5′
f.
3′
Figure 1: Types of alternative splicing events: ( a). exon
inclusion/exclusion; (b). alternative 30 exon end; ( c).
alternative 50 exon end; ( d). intron retention; ( e). and
( f). 50 and 30 alternative untranslated regions (UTRs).
The schematic representation shows exons as boxes,
and introns as straight or segmented lines connecting
the exons. Alternatively spliced elements (exons or
portions of exons) are shown in dark grey, and those
constitutively spliced in light color.
of events, depicted in Figure 1a–d: exon inclusion
and/or exclusion, alternative 50 exon end, alternative
30 exon end, and intron retention. Alternative
50 and 30 untranslated regions (UTRs) are often
encountered (Figure 1e–f), but in general are harder
to identify and characterize due to noisy data and the
intrinsic difficulty in identifying the gene boundaries.
Consequently, they have not been reflected with the
same prevalence in bioinformatics methods and
literature.
The two most important reverberations of
alternative splicing in bioinformatics and computa-
tional biology are in the areas of gene annotation and
splicing regulation [18]. Traditionally, gene discov-
ery was accomplished with a combination of ab initio
and comparative methods designed to identify linear
exon–intron models of genes along a genomic
sequence [19]. Following the sequencing of the
human genome, large-scale annotation projects at
the major genomics centers (Ensembl [20], UCSC
Genome Browser database [21], Celera Genome
Browser and Otto annotation system [22]) typically
employed a variety of prediction methods to
produce ‘evidence’ for the gene, and used a ‘combiner’
algorithm to consolidate the different lines of
evidence into a representative gene model. Lastly,
alternatively spliced forms were added to the
automated annotation by human curators in their
effort to improve the quality and completeness of
the data set. Such sets were tedious to create and
captured only partly the repertoire of splicing
variation. More recently, the gene annotation land-
scape has changed to incorporate alternatively spliced
transcripts or alternative splicing events as an integral
part of the annotation process. There has recently
been a concomitant increase in the number of
repositories containing and cataloguing alternative
splicing information.
Equally important is the question of what causes
and/or controls the variation in splicing. Unlike
transcriptional control exercised from the promoter,
which modulates exclusively the amount of gene
expression, the control of alternative splicing deter-
mines the abundance, structure and function of
transcripts and encoded proteins from a gene, and
can alter such salient properties of proteins as binding
affinity, intracellular localization, enzymatic activity,
stability and post-translational modifications [23].
Furthermore, exon selection in alternative splicing
can be tissue, developmental stage or disease specific
[13, 24], or can change in response to external
stimuli such as receptor stimulation, cellular stress or
changes in neuronal activity [25]. Thus, the regula-
tion of alternative splicing presents a more versatile
and finer granularity control than transcriptional
regulation.
Most of the splicing regulation that is not part of
the basal spliceosome function is known to be
undertaken by families of splicing regulatory pro-
teins. These splicing factors bind to signals in the
vicinity of the exon and promote the exon’s
inclusion or exclusion by activating or inhibiting
the function of the splice site. The number of classes
and characteristics of these regulatory proteins and
their RNA binding sites are relatively little known
and are currently under active investigation.
In this article, we present an overview of
bioinformatics methods to date to identify,

Page 57:
characterize and catalogue alternative splicing and its
regulation.
IDENTIFICATION OF SPLICE
VARIANTS
While different tissues or cell types in an organism
have roughly the same genome, their transcriptomes
could be significantly different. The end goal of
alternative splicing annotation is to identify and
catalogue all mRNA transcripts in the cells of an
organism at various stages, together with relevant
information about their spatial and temporal expres-
sion and function. This is analogous to the gene
annotation problem that has been in the cross hairs
for the past two decades. Given the incomplete and
fragmented nature of the data and the insufficient
experimental characterization, this goal is currently
difficult to achieve, if not impossible (specific
challenges are listed in the forthcoming sections).
A variation that is more readily attainable and can
be just as powerful for practical purposes, such as
designing diagnostic markers that can be tested
in vitro via microarray and proteomic experiments
[26] or in silico [27] is that of identifying and
annotating splice forms, i.e. mutually exclusive
splicing patterns inferred from partial cDNA and/or
protein sequences, or exon-level alternative spli-
cing events. Of particular interest are exons or
combinations of exons that undergo different
splicing patterns.
Bioinformatics
Approaches for identifying full-length splice variants
or just splice forms typically involve the comparison
of two or more expressed DNA or protein sequences
of different isoforms to detect differences caused by
insertions or deletions of genetic material. Direct
comparison between the sequences of different
cDNA and protein isoforms (Figure 2a) reveals the
differences between the sequences compared, but
does not characterize them in the context of the
gene’s structure. The observed difference can be an
exon, part of an exon, or a set of consecutive exons
and exon portions. In contrast, comparisons of
exon^intron structures from cDNA- or protein-
genomic spliced alignments clearly distinguish
among the types of alternative splicing events
(Figure 2b) and provide an extended genomic
context in which the nearby splicing regulatory
regions can be explored.
Sequence data
Computational approaches rely on cDNA and
protein sequences collected in large repositories in
GenBank and around the world. Database for
expressed sequence tags (dbEST) [28] contains
single-pass EST sequences from direct submissions
to GenBank. RefSeq [29] is an NCBI effort to
collect, review and curate full-length mRNA
sequences from submissions or gene prediction
projects. More recently, the Mammalian Gene
Collection (MGC) project [30] was started as an
NIH initiative to clone and sequence full-length
open reading frames (ORFs) for human, mouse and
rat genes. Protein sequences can be obtained from
databases such as SwissProt, TrEMBL and PIR,
currently united into the Universal Protein
Knowledgebase UniProt [31]. The quality and
characteristics of the data may differ significantly,
and thus in judging the potential for identified
differences to represent true alternative splicing
events considerations about the type, quality and
reliability of data are important.
Alignment tools
A number of specialized programs have been
developed to align cDNA sequences to genomic
sequences allowing for sequencing errors, poly-
morphisms and introns, such as EST_GENOME
[32], Sim4 [33], Spidey [34], and GeneSeqer [35].
These programs were designed specifically to
compare a cDNA with the restricted genomic
range encompassing the gene. With the availability
of whole genome sequences, new generation tools
were developed to efficiently map large cDNA data
sets to large chromosomal sequences and whole
genomes. Examples include Blat [36], ESTmapper
[37], MGAlignIt [38], and GMAP [39]. Given a
cDNA sequence, each of these programs generates a
spliced alignment of the cDNA and the genomic
sequence. The alignment clearly marks the locations
of exons and introns in the two sequences and gives
additional information about the match, such as the
predicted strand and alignment quality statistics.
Although all of these programs have reached a high
level of accuracy, challenges remain in dealing with
non-canonical splice junctions, high EST sequencing
error rates or specific types of sequencing errors,
detecting small exons and/or large introns, and
correctly determining the true location of the cDNA
on the genome 

Page 58:
Figure 2: Bioinformatics methods for identifying alternative splicing. ( a) Identification of alternative splicing events
by direct comparison of cDNA sequences (b) comparison of exon ^ intron structures on the genome, ( c) microarray
experiments. In comparisons between pairs of cDNA sequences ( a), alternatively spliced features appear as insertions
in one sequence compared to the other.Comparison of exon ^ intron structures from spliced alignments of cDNAs on
the genome (b) reveal the exons and introns undergoing alternative splicing. In ( c), microarray GeneChip expression
data using multiple probes per gene show potential alternative splicing events as groups of probes that are differentially
expressed between the two experiments (probes p4 and p5 in exon 2). ( d). Clustering and assembly of EST sequences
into transcript-oriented groups and contigs. ( e) EST sequences from the 50 and 30 ends of the gene are compared to
identify compatible overlaps and then assembled into consensus sequences (TC1, TC 2) representing putative splice
variants. Spliced alignments of cDNAs on the genome (E1^E5) are clustered along the genomic axis and consolidated
into splice graphs.Vertices in the splice graph represent exons (a ^ h), arcs are introns connecting the exons consistently
with the cDNA evidence, and a branching in the graph signals an alternative splicing event. Splice variants (V1^V4) are
read from the graph as paths from a source vertex (with no ‘in’ arc) to a sink vertex (with no ‘out’ arc). In some systems,
they are assigned scores based on the strength of the supporting evidence, based on which high-scoring candidates are
selected for inclusion into the annotation and/or for validation experiments.
BIOINFORMATICS METHODS
Since identifying partial splice forms and alternative
splicing events via differences between different
isoforms is intuitive, subsequently we focus on the
more complex task of annotating full-length alter-
natively spliced transcripts. Such methods include
gene indices, which assemble putative splice variants
from overlapping EST and mRNA sequences
without resorting to a reference genome, and
genome-based methods for clustering spliced
alignments and inferring gene models.
Gene indices
Gene indices are gene- or transcript-oriented
collections of EST and mRNA sequences grouped
by sequence similarity. Traditional methods compare
all EST and mRNA sequences against each other
to identify significant overlaps, then group and

Page 59:
assemble sequences with compatible overlaps into
disjoint clusters (Figure 2d). The term ‘gene indices’
may be used to refer to the annotated collec-
tions of sequences (UniGene [40]), to the
multiple alignments of sequences in the clusters,
or to the consensus sequences generated from the
multiple alignments (TIGR Gene Indices [41],
GeneNest [42]).
Constructing gene indices is complicated by a
number of factors. Over-clustering may occur when
differences between paralogs are interpreted as
sequencing errors, forcing paralogs into a same
cluster, or when contamination of ESTs with
vector or linker sequences or residual polyA tails
creates false appearances of overlaps. Other times,
insufficient EST sampling may result in under-
clustering, where several disconnected clusters are
produced for a same gene. Furthermore, the process
is computationally expensive, as the time required
by the pairwise comparisons increases quadratically
with the number of sequences in the set. To alleviate
these problems, methods were developed to trim
the vector and low-quality ends of the EST
sequences prior to the comparison, pre-cluster the
sequences by aligning EST sequences against the
known primary mRNA form (seeded clustering),
and to a priori cluster almost identical or con-
tained sequences to reduce the complexity of the
clustering [43].
Genome-based clustering and assembly
In the genome-based approach, the spliced align-
ments of cDNA and protein sequences are clustered
at loci along the genomic sequence. To distinguish
among possibly different genes sharing the same

Page 60:
genomic locus, including overlapping genes and
sense–antisense transcripts [44], clustering is often
refined to group alignments separately on each strand
of the genomic sequence, and requires that the
sequences share common splice junctions in addition
to overlapping exons.
One recent innovation in alternative splicing
annotation has been the concept of a splice graph,
as a model for concisely capturing splice variations
within a gene. The splice graph represents a gene
as a directed acyclic graph in which exons are
represented as vertices, introns are the arcs connect-
ing the exons, and splice variants are the paths
obtained by traversing the graph from a source
vertex (with no incoming arcs) to a sink vertex
(with no outgoing arcs). With this set of rules,
cDNA and protein spliced alignments at a genomic
locus can be consolidated into a spliced graph
(Figure 2e) and candidate full-length splice variants
can be enumerated from the graph in a combinato-
rial fashion. The combinatorial nature of the splice
graph is also, however, the main limitation of the
model, since some of the exon combinations it
encodes may be artificial constructs without bio-
logical relevance. Different methods have been
proposed to select or prioritize candidate transcripts
in order to differentiate between those most likely
to be biologically relevant and those likely to be
artifactual. For instance, the annotation intergrated
resource AIR annotation pipeline [37] assigns splice
variants confidence scores based on a set of four
characteristics measuring the strength of the support-
ing cDNA and protein evidence, such as the quality
and length of the supporting alignments, accuracy
of splice signals and the level of fragmentation
of the evidence. High-scoring candidates are later
selected and promoted into the annotation. The
ECgene [45] system classifies candidate transcripts
into three categories, high-, medium- and low-
confidence, based on the number of cDNA align-
ments that were stitched together to construct it.
Other methods simply defer the task of transcript
selection to the users, but provide additional
information and visualization to aid in the analysis
[46, 47].
The genome-based approaches solve a number of
deficiencies observed with the gene indices. By
mapping the ESTs to the genome contamination
from foreign matter, such as vector and linker
sequences, or from polyA tails are removed.
In addition, the sequencing errors that were
compounded between the cDNA sequences in the
gene indices method are now resolved by aligning
the sequence against the genome, used as reference.
As a result, fewer sequences are misplaced along the
genome, resulting in considerably less clustering
of paralogs. However, genome-based clustering has
its own set of limitations. Some of the remaining
issues that have to be resolved involve the contam-
ination of ESTs with genomic fragments or
incompletely spliced forms that could produce
over-clustering of neighboring or overlapping
genes, errors in the alignment, particularly inaccuracy
of splice junctions and missing short exons, and
strand prediction. Other limitations of the splice
graph model include its inability to fully capture
splicing variations where one variant is a 50 or 30
extension of another, and its sensitivity to alignment
errors, as one spurious exon may double the number
of candidates.
Identifying splice variation from
microarray data
Recently, the Affymetrix chip design using multiple
probes per gene has been used to identify splice
variations. The Affymetrix GeneChip technology
uses 22 probes collected from within the exons
or straddling the exon boundaries in the 30UTR
of the sampled genes (Figure 2c). When an exon
is alternatively spliced between two microarray
experiments, the expression level of its probes in
the two arrays will be different and, in at least one
of the experiments, significantly dissimilar to those
of their neighbors. Thus, statistical tests were
developed to determine the significance of these
differences and to predict alternative splicing events
[48, 49].
RESOURCES FOR
ALTERNATIVE SPLICING
The recent years have witnessed a growth in
the number of resources—programs, databases and
web servers—for the identification and analysis of
alternative splicing, directly reflecting the variety of
data generation methods. A summary of these
resources is given in Table 1.
A growing number of databases have emerged that
collect instances of alternative splicing events inferred
computationally from pairwise comparisons of cDNA
and protein sequences (PALSdb [52], EASED [55]),
their genomic exon-intron structures (ASAP [50],

Page 61:
AltExtron and AltSplice [51], SpliceInfo [54]), or
GenBank annotations (AsMamDb [53]). In addition
to sequence and splicing-related information, they
may contain annotations such as tissue specificity,
developmental stage, expression data, exon GC and
repeat content, conservation in other species and
the biological function where known. In contrast,
the AEDB database maintained as part of the
alternative splicing database (ASD) [51] contains
experimentally identified alternatively spliced exons
and splicing regulatory signals extracted from the
literature, with links to relevant MEDLINE entries
documenting the events.
In addition to databases, several programs
and software pipelines for predicting genes and
alternatively spliced transcripts based on genomically
aligned cDNA and protein sequences have been
developed to support genome annotation projects:
ClusterMerge [57] produces the Ensembl ESTgenes,
AIR [37] was used to annotate the Celera rat
genome, and PASA [56] reconstructed transcripts in
the TIGR annotation of Arabidopsis thaliana. Outside
the spectrum of genome annotation projects, ASG
[46] provides internet accessible splice graphs for
several eukaryotic genomes and ASmodeler [58]
allows users to create their own splice graph
annotations via a web interface.
Lastly, the most comprehensive gene index
collections to date are the TIGR Gene Indices [41]
and the NCBI UniGene collection [40].

Page 62:
HURDLES IN ALTERNATIVE
SPLICING ANNOTATION
Although tremendous strides were taken in the past
few years to identify and catalogue splice variation
in the human and other eukaryotic genomes, this
chapter of genomics is still very much a draft. Among
the factors that continue to confound annotation
methods are:
(i) EST quality—contamination of EST sequences
with genomic, cross-species and vector
sequences, high sequencing error rates,
chimeras;
(ii) alignment accuracy—ambiguity of predicted
strands, alignment errors, particularly at the
splice junctions, missing exons;
(iii) limitations in models and data—insufficient
data, for instance for tissue-specific clustering,
EST fragmentation; and
(iv) complexity of biological processes—paralogs,
trans-splicing, sense–antisense transcripts and
overlapping genes.
With its far-reaching implications for biology
and medicine, identifying and characterizing alter-
native splicing variation is becoming an important
part of the effort for detecting and cataloguing
the genes. Thus, developing a comprehensive
catalogue of splicing variation will require
mobilization to produce fast and accurate tools for
automatic annotation, coupled with an assiduous
curation effort and high-throughput validation
by sequencing, RT–PCR and microarray
experiments [59].
ALTERNATIVE SPLICING
REGULATION
An equally intense area of research in alternative
splicing revolves about the factors and mechanisms of
splicing regulation.
Pre-mRNA splicing is a complex cellular process
undertaken in the cytoplasm by the spliceosome.
The spliceosome assembles onto each intron from a
set of five small nuclear ribonucleoproteins (snRNPs
U1, U2, U4–U6) and numerous accessory proteins
that bind specifically to locations at or within the
vicinity of the splice sites, and catalyzes the excision
of the intron [60]. While the 50 (donor) and 30
(acceptor) splice sites have well characterized con-
sensus sequences that are recognized to play a major
role in splicing, an increasing body of evidence
reveals that previously unknown RNA elements
located outside the splice signals, in exons and
introns, contribute to the exon’s inclusion or
exclusion in the mature mRNA, in a network of
interactions that appear to be centered on exons,
rather than introns. These cis-regulatory elements
can promote (splicing enhancers) or repress (splicing
silencers) the inclusion of the exon in the mRNA
through the activity of the bound regulatory
proteins, and can be located in the exons—exonic
splicing enhancers (ESEs) and silencers (ESS), or
introns—intronic splicing enhancers (ISE) and silencers
(ISS). They can act from both within the proximity
of the exon, or from 300–1000 bp away. It is
becoming increasingly evident that many exons,
constitutive or alternative, and their surrounding
introns harbor both silencing and enhancing ele-
ments, and that the exon’s inclusion/exclusion is the
result of competition between the two effects [61].
Mechanisms of splicing activation
Exonic enhancers are the binding sites of splicing
activator proteins, the most studied activators being
the SR (Ser/Arg) factors. The SR proteins are
characterized by the presence of 1–2 RNA recogni-
tion motifs (RRM), and a C-terminal RS-domain
enriched in Arg/Ser dipeptides. The primary
mechanism by which they promote splicing is by
attaching to enhancer elements within the exon or in
the polypyrimidine tract via their RRM domain and
recruiting the U2AF factor with their RS domain.
An RS-domain independent mechanism has also
been hypothesized, in which the splicing factor binds
to an ESE to antagonize the effect of a neighboring
silencer [62] (Figure 3a,b). Exonic splicing enhancer
motifs have been characterized through a variety of
bioinformatics methods and through functional
experiments. Their mechanism, diversity and action
were reviewed in [63].
Mechanisms of splicing repression
Splicing silencers are thought to be binding sites of
splicing repressor proteins. Splicing repression is
effected largely through the activity of the hnRNP
protein families. Of these, hnRNP I, also known as
PTB [64], members of the hnRNP A/B families, and
the neuron-specific NOVA-1 inhibitor [65] are
among the best characterized. Several mechanisms
have been proposed for hnRNP-mediated silencing
(Figure 3c–e): by interfering with the spliceosome

Page 63:
Figure 3: Mechanisms of alternative splicing regulation: ( a, b). activation; ( c^e). repression. ( a) Splicing activation is
enabled primarily through the activator function of the RS-domain of an SR protein bound to an ESE element through
its RRM domain, (b) or can be RS-domain independent, with the activator blocking the action of a nearby silencing
element in direct competition. ( c) Splicing repression is accomplished primarily by hnRNP proteins, either by neutraliz-
ing the effect of an activator protein through direct competition, ( d) or by cooperative binding of several silencing
factors that displace the ESE-bound activators ( e), or by binding to motifs on either side of the exon followed by dimer-
ization, which places the exon in a loop inaccessible to the splicing apparatus.
assembly through cooperative binding of several
inhibitory elements, by blocking neighboring ESEs,
or by binding to duplicate intronic sequences
on both sides of the exon to form a loop that
renders the exon inaccessible to the spliceosome.
Experimentally identified or validated ISS sequences
were reviewed in [66].
regulatory sites, the specific challenges associated
with identifying splicing regulatory sites arise from
the fact that few proteins have been identified, and
that the full extent of splicing regulatory factors,
including the number of proteins and the prevalence
of their binding sites on the pre-RNA sequence,
cannot be estimated yet.
BIOINFORMATICS METHODS FOR
IDENTIFYING SPLICING
REGULATORY ELEMENTS
Methods for identifying and characterizing splicing
regulatory elements are still in their infancy, varying
from experimental to computational and from
focused to large-scale, and can be centered on the
splicing factors (proteins) or their binding sites.
Emphasizing that all types of approaches have
produced valuable results, we hereto focus on
computational methods. While there are many
similarities with the detection of transcriptional
Consensus sequences
Most early work on splicing enhancers targeted
purine-rich exonic elements that were thought to be
binding sites of SR proteins (Table 2) and produced a
number of site consensus sequences [62]. A con-
sensus sequence uses IUPAC codes to specify what
symbols are allowed at every position in the motif’s
sequence, but cannot quantify the preference for
certain symbols at a given motif position. The
purine-rich model for regulatory sequences was put
to rest when ESE sequences in IgM and in the avian
sarcoma pre-mRNA were found to retain their

Page 64:
Table 2: Consensus motifs for SR protein dependent
enhancers [62]. Reproduced with permission from
Nature Reviews Genetics, Vol. 3, pp. 385 ^398, copyright
(2002) Macmillan Magazines Ltd
Protein High-affinity binding site* Functional ESE*
SRp20 WCW WC GCUCCUCUUCC
CUCKUCY CCUCGUCC
SC35 AGSAGAGUA GRYYMCYR
GUUCGAGUA UGCYGYY
UGUUCSAGUAGKS
AGGAGAU
9G8 (GAC)n
ACGAGAGAY
WGGACRA
SF2/ASF RGAAGAAC CRSMSGW
AGGACRRAGC
SRp40 UGGGAGCRGUYRGCUCGY YRCRKM
SRp55 YYWCWSG
TRA2b (GAA)n
*IUPAC codes: M¼ A or C; R¼ A or G; W¼ A or U; Y¼C or U; S¼ C
or G; K¼G or U
effect in vitro even after their purine-rich stretches
were eliminated [67, 68].
Position weight matrices
Position weight matrices (PWMs) are a more suitable
model for specifying the variability of symbols in a
motif sequence. The PWMs are matrices of scores
constructed from the nucleotide frequencies at
each position within the motif, typically derived
from a collection of experimentally identified
sites (Figure 4). A PWM specifies a score for each
nucleotide at every motif position. The score of a
candidate oligonucleotide sequence is then com-
puted as the sum of the individual nucleotide score
contributions, and used as an indicator for the
reliability of the match: the higher the score, the
stronger and more reliable the match. The PWMs
for four splicing activator factors, SF2/ASF, SC35,
SRp40 and SRp55, were constructed from align-
ments of binding sites identified with functional
in vivo and in vitro systematic evolution of ligands by
exponential (SELEX) enrichment experiments using
a minigene construct to test the effects of ESEs on
splicing [69]. These are the only experimentally
derived PWMs of splicing factors to date.
Statistical over-representation of k-mers
Statistical methods, emblematic for post-genome
large-scale genomics, aim at identifying sequence
elements that are enriched in one class of contexts,
defining the biological setting of the element sought,
compared with another, defining the background or
null setting. Typically, the candidate sequence
elements are simple oligonucleotides of length k
(k-mers), thought to form the core of splicing
regulatory motifs. The methods start with the set
of all k-mers, for a value of k selected based on
statistical or empirical considerations, and assign them
scores that measure the difference between the
oligonucleotide frequencies in the two types of
contexts. Thus, the first step of such methods consists
of identifying a number of attributes that biologically
characterize the elements, and the two sets of
contexts, ‘functional’ versus ‘null’, for each attribute.
Each candidate k-mer is then assigned a value for
each attribute that statistically characterizes its relative
positioning between the two contexts. Lastly, a set
of candidate k-mers that show statistically significant
differences between the two contexts for each of the
attributes is selected for further analysis or for
validation in vivo or in vitro.
Several variations of this model have been used
under different biological assumptions, or attributes.
Fairbrother et al. [71] started from the following
assumptions about ESE elements: (i) ESE motifs are
more likely to occur in exons than in introns; and
(ii) ESE motifs are more likely to occur in weak
exons (with non-consensus splice sites) than strong
exons (with consensus splice sites). For k¼ 6, the
score function for each of the 4096 6-mers was
calculated as the difference between the frequency of
the k-mer in exons versus introns, and in weak versus
strong exons, scaled by the standard deviation of the
sample. Candidates that showed significant enrich-
ment in both tests, corresponding to a scaled differ-
ence value larger than 2.5 (or equivalently, with
scaled differences >2.5 standard deviations) were
selected. These hexamer sequences were then
clustered by sequence similarity and aligned to
form PWMs for ESE motifs. A similar approach
led to the computational rediscovery of the
UGCAUG hexanucleotide motif in introns proximal
to brain-tissue specific alternative exons, by compar-
ing the frequency of the hexamer in introns down-
stream of constitutive versus alternatively spliced
exons [72]. The motif had been previously experi-
mentally identified as part of a splicing enhancer
for exon N1 in the c-src gene [73]. In another study,
Zhang and Chasin [74] focused on constitutive
splicing and searched for 8-mers over-represented in
internal noncoding exons, thought to contain signals

Page 65:
Figure 4: Bioinformatics representations of splicing regulatory motifs: ( a) consensus sequence and (b) position
weight matrix (PWM). A consensus sequence specifies the set of bases that can appear at each position in the motif,
using accepted IUPAC letter codes to represent combinations of bases. A PWM is a more expressive representation,
incorporating the expected proportions of bases at each position in the motif. A PWM has a score for each base (A, C,
G, T shown on rows) at each position in the motif sequence (shown along columns), derived from the site nucleotide
counts (N) and frequencies (f ) with a log-odds formula [70].The score for a candidate nucleotide sequence is the sum
of individual nucleotide scores at the corresponding motif positions: the higher the score, the better the match and the
more likely to be real.
that would mediate splicing, compared to unspliced
pseudoexons and 50 UTRs of transcripts of intronless
genes.
Motif discovery
Motif discovery methods commonly used in identi-
fying transcription factor binding motifs in unaligned
sequences, such as MEME [75] and Gibbs sampling
[76], can also be employed to identify splicing
regulatory signals. Although they achieved some
success in identifying two regulatory motifs in
introns surrounding 54 alternatively spliced exons
[77], it is hard to estimate what their predictive
power will be in a large set of diverse sequences,
harboring a potentially wide variety of regulatory
signals with low sequence specificity. For best results,
pre-selecting and curating the data, for instance
by selecting tissue-specific events, or validating the
results with an independent method, such as
comparative studies of alternatively spliced exons
in the human and mouse species [77], is essential.
Comparative studies
Conserved regions in alignments of orthologous
introns of human and mouse, or similarly related
species, provide good candidates for functional
sequences. Surprisingly, in the context of alternative
splicing, comparative methods have focused less on
predicting specific splicing regulatory signals and
more on characterizing the large-scale patterns of
sequence conservation [78, 47], or on validating
motifs identified by other methods [77]. For instance,
intronic sequences flanking alternatively spliced
exons compared to constitutive exons were found
to be more strongly conserved between human and
mouse, thus suggesting that their splicing mecha-
nisms may be different from those of constitutively
spliced exons [78].
Identification of regulatory signals within coding
sequences of exons by sequence comparison is further
complicated by the fact that additional selective
pressure is imposed on the coding sequence by the
necessity to preserve the protein. Several studies

Page 66:
showed that purifying selective pressure may act
against silent mutations in certain regions in the
coding sequence [79], and that the phenomenon is
more pronounced in alternatively spliced exons [80].
There are also indications that exonic portions of
splice sites may undergo positive selection to stabilize
during the evolution of introns after insertion [81].
These findings may herald new methods, based on
sequence evolutionary models and tools and taking
advantage of the large volumes of multi-species data
becoming available. Already, Blanchette [82] used
phylogenetic methods to distinguish between con-
servation due to amino acid constraints and con-
servation due to regulatory factors in predicting
splicing regulatory signals in coding sequences.
has reemerged as a central concept in the post-
genome sequencing era. Determining the extent and
importance of alternative splicing required the
confluence of critical advances in data acquisition,
improved understanding of biological processes and
the development of fast and accurate computational
analysis tools.
While tremendous progress has been made in
annotating alternative splicing variations and
exploratory steps were taken into the regulation of
alternative splicing, there is a long path to fully
understanding how it manifests itself in the cell and
what are the determining factors to be able to use
and interpret this information in disease diagnostics
and treatment. In creating an alternative splicing
compendium, comparative and functional genomics
efforts must address immediate challenges such as
improving the accuracy of annotations by differ-
entiating informative events from experimental or
computational artifacts and by evaluating the accu-
racy of existing methods, as well as medium- to
long-term goals, including the systematic generation
of EST and mRNA sequences from a variety of
tissues and under various cell conditions, the
development of new methods for the prediction
and analysis of splicing regulatory elements and
mechanisms, and breakthroughs in high-throughput
technologies for in vitro and in vivo validation and
functional characterizations. These are the first steps
toward the genetic medicine of the future.
RESOURCES FOR ALTERNATIVE
SPLICING REGULATION
The repertoire of resources to aid in annotating
splicing regulatory regions reflects the early state of
bioinformatics and experimental studies in this area.
A web-based tool, called ESEfinder, was implemen-
ted to allow users to search their sequences for
matches to the binding motifs of four splicing
activators identified by SELEX experiments, SF2/
ASF, SC35, SRp40, SRp55 (http://rulai.cshl.edu/
tools/ESE/) [83]. Another web-based tool,
RESCUE-ESE [84], searches user-input sequences
for the presence of specific 6-mer motifs previously
identified as potential cores of splicing regulatory
motifs by statistical over-representation methods
(http://genes.mit.edu/burgelab/rescue-ese/). The
SpliceInfo [54] alternative splicing environment
(http://spliceinfo.mbc.nctu.edu.tw/) provides tools
for the discovery of sequence or structural motifs
(Mfold [85], Gibbs sampling [76], MEME[75]) in
sequences of annotated exons and introns, while
the AEDB [51] database (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/asd/
aedb/) collects experimentally identified splicing
regulatory sites and sequences from the literature.
Lastly, more general sequence alignment and
visualization tools such as PipMaker [86] (http://
pipmaker.bx.psu.edu/pipmaker/) and Vista [87]
(http://genome.lbl.gov/vista/mvista/submit.shtml)
can aid in the discovery of intronic regulatory signals.
Key Points
Alternative splicing has important implications for biology and
medicine.
Identifying all splice variations and the signals that regulate spli-
cing are core problems in genomics and bioinformatics.
Large EST data sets and sequence data from multiple genomes
are fueling efforts to develop new computational methods to
address these problems.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/bib/article-abstract/7/1/55/263665 by guest on 14 April 2020
Acknowledgment
Thanks to Rosane Charlab for her careful review of the
manuscript.
CONCLUSIONS
Alternative splicing is without doubt one of the most
important gene regulatory mechanisms, and one that
References
1. 2. Gilbert W. Why genes in pieces?. Nature 1978;271:501.
Breitbart RE, Andreadis A, Nadal Ginard B. Alternative
splicing: a ubiquitous mechanism for the generation of
multiple protein isoforms from single genes. Ann Rev Bioch
1987;56:467–95.
3. Mironov AA, Fickett JW, Gelfand MS. Frequent alterna

Page 67 is just more references


Liu et al.:

Page 1228:
Impact of Alternative Splicing on the Human
Proteome
Graphical Abstract
Authors
Yansheng Liu, Mar Gonza ` lez-Porta,
Sergio Santos, ..., Ruedi Aebersold,
Ashok R. Venkitaraman,
Vihandha O. Wickramasinghe
Correspondence
aebersold@imsb.biol.ethz.ch (R.A.),
arv22@mrc-cu.cam.ac.uk (A.R.V.),
vi.wickramasinghe@petermac.org
(V.O.W.)
In Brief
Liu et al. have developed an integrative
approach to ask whether perturbations in
mRNA splicing patterns alter the
composition of the proteome. Their
findings illustrate how RNA splicing links
isoform expression in the human
transcriptome with proteomic diversity
and provides a foundation for studying
perturbations associated with human
diseases.
Highlights
d Integrative approach to study contribution of alternative
splicing to proteome
d Changes in isoform usage alter protein abundance
proportionate to transcript levels
d Intron retention is accompanied by decreased protein
abundance
d Differential gene expression functionally tunes the human
proteome
Accession Numbers

Page 1229:
Impact of Alternative Splicing
on the Human Proteome
Yansheng Liu,1,5 Mar Gonza ` lez-Porta,2,5 Sergio Santos,2 Alvis Brazma,2 John C. Marioni,2 Ruedi Aebersold,1,
*
Ashok R. Venkitaraman,3,
* and Vihandha O. Wickramasinghe3,4,6,
*
1Department of Biology, Institute of Molecular Systems Biology, ETH Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland
2European Molecular Biology Laboratory-European Bioinformatics Institute (EMBL-EBI), Hinxton, UK
3The Medical Research Council Cancer Unit, University of Cambridge, Cambridge CB2 0XZ, UK
4RNA Biology and Cancer Laboratory, Peter MacCallum Cancer Centre, Melbourne, VIC 3000, Australia
5These authors contributed equally
6Lead Contact
*Correspondence: aebersold@imsb.biol.ethz.ch (R.A.), arv22@mrc-cu.cam.ac.uk (A.R.V.), vi.wickramasinghe@petermac.org (V.O.W.)
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.celrep.2017.07.025
SUMMARY
Alternative splicing is a critical determinant of
genome complexity and, by implication, is assumed
to engender proteomic diversity. This notion has not
been experimentally tested in a targeted, quantitative
manner. Here, we have developed an integrative
approach to ask whether perturbations in mRNA
splicing patterns alter the composition of the prote-
ome. We integrate RNA sequencing (RNA-seq) (to
comprehensively report intron retention, differential
transcript usage, and gene expression) with a data-
independent acquisition (DIA) method, SWATH-MS
(sequential window acquisition of all theoretical
spectra-mass spectrometry), to capture an unbi-
ased, quantitative snapshot of the impact of
constitutive and alternative splicing events on the pro-
teome. Whereas intron retention is accompanied by
decreased protein abundance, alterations in differen-
tial transcript usage and gene expression alter protein
abundance proportionate to transcript levels. Our
findings illustrate how RNA splicing links isoform
expression in the human transcriptome with proteo-
mic diversity and provides a foundation for studying
perturbations associated with human diseases.
the contribution of alternative splicing to proteomic composition
and diversity have focused exclusively on the identification of
proteins derived from alternatively spliced transcripts in a
steady-state system (Blakeley et al., 2010; Brosch et al., 2011;
Ezkurdia et al., 2012; Lander et al., 2001; Leoni et al., 2011; Tress
et al., 2008; Xing et al., 2011; Zhou et al., 2010). More recent
studies have incorporated expression data, such as evidence
from RNA-seq experiments, in the interrogation of proteomic da-
tasets to reduce mapping noise (Lopez-Casado et al., 2012; Ning
and Nesvizhskii, 2010; Sheynkman et al., 2013; Tanner et al.,
2007). However, none of these studies have attempted to quan-
tify the contribution of alternative splicing to proteomic diversity in
a systematic manner. Here, we seek to address this fundamental
biological question by asking whether selective perturbations in
RNA splicing patterns manifest as changes in the composition
of the proteome. By using this system, we have established in a
quantitative manner how changes in splicing of a subset of tran-
scripts determine differential protein expression.
INTRODUCTION
Next-generation RNA sequencing (RNA-seq) has identified alter-
native splicing of RNA transcripts as a key mechanism that may
underlie the diversification of proteins encoded in the human
genome. Such diversification may be essential for biologic
complexity, because the number of protein-coding human genes
is lower than was widely predicted before the genome sequence
was known (Kim et al., 2014; Lander et al., 2001). Transcripts from
95% of multi-exon human genes are alternatively spliced (Pan
et al., 2008; Wang et al., 2008). However, the extent to which
this increased genomic complexity contributes to the generation
of proteomic diversity is largely unknown. Initial efforts to assess
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Experimental Strategy to Study Alternative Splicing at
the Proteomic Level
We selectively perturbed RNA splicing by depleting the core
spliceosome U5 small nuclear ribonucleo protein (snRNP)
component PRPF8 and assessed subsequent transcriptomic
and proteomic changes by RNA-seq and SWATH-MS (sequen-
tial window acquisition of all theoretical spectra-mass spec-
trometry), respectively (Figure 1). This is a compelling system
because a number of studies have demonstrated the regulatory
potential of the core spliceosome machinery (Clark et al., 2002;
Papasaikas et al., 2015; Park et al., 2004; Pleiss et al., 2007;
Saltzman et al., 2011; Wickramasinghe et al., 2015). Further-
more, we have extensively experimentally validated this system
for studying splicing at the mRNA level (Wickramasinghe et al.,
2015). Thus, using DEXSeq (Anders et al., 2012), we previously
identified 3,370 transcripts with altered splicing patterns after
PRPF8 depletion (1,284 with differential exon usage, 1,449
with intron retention, 637 with both), which constitute only a
subset of all expressed protein-coding genes (13,216 genes;
expression threshold = 1 fragments per kilobase million

Page 1230:
Transcript A Protein Coding
Transcript B Protein Coding
Transcript C Protein Coding
Transcript D Retained Intron
Selective perturbation
of RNA splicing
RNA-sequencing to assess
transcriptomic changes
Transcript
Isoform Abundance
Control PRPF8
Depletion
Differential
Transcript
Usage (DTU)
Intron
Retention
Unchanged
Transcript
Usage
Differential
Gene Expression
(DGE)
400-1200 m/z
SWATH and SRM measurements
to assess effects at protein level
SWATH-MS
Intensity
m/z
Retention time
Validation by targeted SRM
Q1 Q2 Q3
Intensity
Time
Peptide
Synthesis
Integration of RNA-sequencing
with
SWATH/SRM MS data
RNA-seq SWATH/SRM
Peptide 1
Transcripts A, B, C
Peptide 2
Peptide 3
Differential transcript usage
Integration - based on RNA-seq and transcript isoform abundance
Assignment
Peptide 1
Peptide 2
Peptide 3
Ambiguous
Transcript A
Transcript B
No Transcript
Effect of splicing changes on protein levels
Time
Figure 1. Framework to Study Contribution
of Alternative Splicing to Proteomic Compo-
sition and Diversity
Experimental and analysis workflow. Top: RNA
splicing can result in generation of multiple tran-
scripts as indicated in this hypothetical example,
including different protein coding transcripts
(transcripts A–C), as well as transcripts with re-
tained introns (transcript D). Protein coding exons
are represented by solid color bars, 50 and 30 un-
translated regions are represented by white boxes,
introns are represented by black lines, and a re-
tained intron is represented by a dark red bar. We
selectively perturbed RNA splicing by depleting the
core spliceosome factor PRPF8 and used RNA-seq
to assess the transcriptomic changes (left) and
mass spectrometry to assess the effects at the
protein level (right). PRPF8 depletion can alter the
relative transcript abundance of the 4 transcripts,
resulting in differential transcript usage (DTU),
intron retention, or unchanged transcript usage.
We have defined DTU to include cases where there
is a change in transcript relative abundance be-
tween conditions. Differential gene expression
(DGE) may also result, where the relative transcript
abundances are unchanged between conditions,
but changes in expression at the gene level are
observed. We used SWATH-MS (sequential win-
dow acquisition of all theoretical spectra) to assess
the effects at the protein level, which were vali-
dated by targeted SRM (selective reaction moni-
toring). We integrated the complete proteomic
dataset based on knowledge from our RNA-seq
experiments in order to guide the peptide
assignments (bottom panel). Because peptide 2
maps uniquely to transcript B, it is assigned to
transcript B. Peptide 1 maps to multiple transcripts
in the same gene (A and C), but after PRPF8
depletion, the expression of only one of these
transcripts is changed. The change affects the
dominant expressed isoform for this gene (known
as a major transcript), hence, peptide 1 is assigned
to transcript A. In contrast, peptide 3 maps simul-
taneously to multiple differentially used transcripts
and is therefore considered ambiguous, precluding
assignment to any transcript.
[FPKM]) (Wickramasinghe et al., 2015). To enable the quantifica-
tion of a large fraction of the proteome with high accuracy, we
used a recently developed data-independent acquisition (DIA)
method, SWATH mass spectrometry (SWATH-MS), which com-
bines the comprehensive proteome coverage of conventional
shotgun proteomics with the high reproducibility and quantita-
tive accuracy of targeted protein profiling based on SRM (selec-
tive reaction monitoring) (Gillet et al., 2012; Liu et al., 2013; Ro ¨ st
et al., 2014). Using SWATH-MS and the OpenSWATH software
(Ro ¨ st et al., 2014), we were able to identify and quantify 14,695
peptides (false discovery rate [FDR] 1%) across three biological
replicates for each condition that uniquely
map to 2,805 protein-encoding Ensembl
genes. SWATH-MS yielded high repro-
ducibility between technical (averaged
Pearson correlation coefficient R = 0.99) and biological repli-
cates (averaged R = 0.94) (Figure S1A). Collectively, 1,542 pro-
teins display at least one peptide with altered protein expression
levels after PRPF8 depletion (Figure S1B). Functional annotation
revealed that transcripts with altered splicing patterns and pro-
teins with altered levels are enriched in the same functional cat-
egories, namely translation, RNA splicing, mitotic cell cycle, and
ubiquitination (Figure S1C). In contrast, proteins with unchanged
levels after PRPF8 depletion are not enriched in these categories
and are instead enriched for those involved in transcription and
ribosome biogenesis (Figure S1D). Thus, significant alternative

Page 1231:
Table 1. Alternative Integration Strategies for Differently Used Transcripts and Peptides Detected by SWATH Mass Spectrometry
Transcript Set (DTU All No.) Peptide Set (No.) Initial Overlap After Assignment Correlation Coefficient (r) Agreement (%)
DTU All Transcripts and Uniquely Mapping Peptides
transcript 30 30 r 0.487 Y, 21 (70)
transcripts (452) peptides (2,974) peptides 65 65 p value 0.01688 N, 9 (30)
genes (388) genes (859) genes 30 30
DTU All Transcripts and All Peptides
transcript 158 118 r 0.274 Y, 68 (57.63)
transcripts (452) peptides (14,695) peptides 700 530 p value 0.00378 N, 50 (42.37)
genes (388) genes (2,805) genes 128 116
DTU Major Transcripts and Uniquely Mapping Peptides
transcript 27 27 r 0.498 Y, 20 (74.07)
transcripts (291) peptides (2,974) peptides 61 61 p value 0.01672 N, 7 (25.93)
genes (263) genes (859) genes 27 27
DTU Major Transcripts and All Peptides
transcript 97 77 r 0.486 Y, 56 (72.73)
transcripts (291) peptides (14,695) peptides 481 419 p value 1.97E 05 N, 21 (27.27)
genes (263) genes (2,805) genes 84 75
splicing events captured at the transcriptome level are function-
ally mirrored at the proteomic level.
Establishing Methods to Integrate RNA-Seq with
SWATH/SRM Mass Spectrometry
To integrate the transcriptomic and proteomic datasets, we
focused on identifying differential splicing events at the tran-
script level, which represents a major computational challenge
(Kitchen et al., 2014; Low et al., 2013; Vogel and Marcotte,
2012). Previous analyses, including our own (Figure S1), have
identified differential splicing events from an exon-centric
perspective through mapping to the genome using DEXSeq (An-
ders et al., 2012). However, this approach is limited given that
differential exon usage provides no information on transcript
expression levels, which is expected to influence protein expres-
sion. Furthermore, differentially used exons may map to many
transcripts from the same gene, making peptide assignment
difficult. To overcome these limitations, we explored a tran-
script-centric approach, which considers transcripts as whole
units, to facilitate the integration with the proteomic dataset.
We first estimated transcript expression levels with MMSEQ
(Turro et al., 2011) and then used its companion tool MMDIFF
(Turro et al., 2014) to identify both differentially expressed genes
and differentially used transcripts. Genes with differential tran-
script usage (DTU) are defined as cases where there is a change
in the transcript relative abundances between conditions (see
pie-charts in Figure 1, left panel). We identified, at high confi-
dence, 388 genes that display DTU and 2,021 genes that display
differential gene expression (DGE) following depletion of PRPF8
(Tables 1 and S3). Transcript levels of differently used transcripts
were validated by RT-PCR (see Figure 5 and Wickramasinghe
et al., 2015 for differently used mitotic transcripts) and genes
with differential expression were validated by qRT-PCR (see
Figure S5C).
We first considered the set of peptides that map uniquely to
alternatively spliced transcripts involved in DTU events, defined
from the mRNA data. In other words, peptide expression levels
can be directly and exclusively associated with the transcripts
of interest. Using this approach, we evaluated the impact
at the protein level of the changes in splicing detected by
RNA-seq experiments, based on the correlation between fold
changes in transcript and peptide expression after PRPF8
depletion. RNA-seq fold changes were calculated from the tran-
script-level expression estimates obtained from MMSEQ. For
each transcript, the fold change represents the median transcript
expression in PRPF8-depleted versus control small interfering
RNA (siRNA)-treated samples across 3 biological replicates.
Peptide fold changes for each transcript were calculated by first
adding up the intensities of all the peptides that mapped to that
transcript in each given biological replicate and then dividing the
median sum for PRPF8 depletion versus controls (hence result-
ing in one fold change per transcript). We observe a Spearman’s
correlation coefficient of 0.49 and a Pearson correlation
coefficient of 0.51 when comparing fold changes in RNA and
protein expression (65 peptides from 30 genes; p value =
0.0169, Spearman; p value = 0.0102, Pearson; correlation test)
(Figure 2A; Table 1). Use of an alternative strategy to determine
peptide fold changes for each transcript, whereby the fold
change for PRPF8 depletion versus controls was determined
individually for each peptide to obtain the median fold change
of all peptides that mapped to that transcript, yielded similar re-
sults (see Table S2). However, uniquely mapping peptides repre-
sent a minority of cases (2,974 out of 14,665 peptides detected
by SWATH-MS), because many peptides, due to their length
yielded from using routine trypsin digestion and the detection
range of biological mass spectrometry, are shared between tran-
script isoforms.
Integration of Complete SWATH Proteomic Dataset
To integrate the complete proteomic dataset, we devised a strat-
egy that takes advantage not only of the information from pep-
tides that map uniquely to one transcript isoform, but also from

Page 1232:
See image, Figure 2

Page 1233:
those that map to several transcripts of the same gene (Fig-
ure 2B). To do this, we used information from our RNA-seq ex-
periments to guide the peptide assignments. More specifically,
for genes with multiple isoforms, many are expressed at an
extremely low level in comparison to the most abundant isoforms
(Gonza ` lez-Porta et al., 2013) (Figure 3A). Such a low level of
mRNA expression is unlikely to manifest itself as expressed pro-
tein product within the dynamic range of the mass spectrometric
method used that is 4.4 orders of magnitude (Figure 3A).
Consequently, for each gene, we considered only the most
highly expressed transcript in each condition (major transcript)
for peptide assignment, discarding cases where DTU did not
arise in one of these. Using this criterion, we identified 263 genes
whose major transcript displayed DTU (Table 1). In some cases,
the identity of the major transcript differs between conditions
(as discussed below), whereupon we determined separately
for each major transcript whether there was evidence of differen-
tial usage following depletion of PRPF8. Subsequently, we used
the regions that distinguished these two transcripts to uniquely
allocate peptides (Figure 2B).
This approach yields peptide fold change information for
419 peptides corresponding to 75 genes that display DTU.
Comparing mRNA fold changes with protein expression using
this dataset yields a Spearman’s correlation coefficient of 0.49
and a Pearson correlation coefficient of 0.37 (Figure 2B; p value =
1.97 3 E 05, Spearman; p value = 0.0015, Pearson; correlation
test) (Table 1). Importantly, this correlation coefficient is broadly
similar to that obtained with uniquely mapping peptides across
all isoforms, but using a significantly larger dataset (419 peptides
from 75 genes versus 65 peptides from 30 genes). Nevertheless,
most weakly expressed major transcripts displaying DTU are
undetectable as expressed protein product within the dynamic
range of mass spectrometry (Figure 3B). When we focus on ma-
jor transcripts and uniquely mapping peptides, we observe a
Spearman’s correlation coefficient of 0.50 and a Pearson corre-
lation coefficient of 0.52 (61 peptides from 27 genes; p value =
0.0167, Spearman; p value = 0.0117, Pearson; correlation test)
(Figure S2). In contrast, use of an alternative integration strategy
that assigns peptides to all differently used transcripts regard-
less of their expression levels resulted in an increase in the data-
set size (530 peptides corresponding to 116 genes that display
DTU) but a sharp decrease in Spearman’s correlation coefficient
to 0.27 and to 0.21 for Pearson (p value = 0.0378, Spearman;
p value = 0.0260, Pearson; correlation test) (Figure 2C; Table 1).
This result suggests that the inclusion of minor transcripts with
low expression levels increases noise at both the mRNA and pro-
tein level, making reliable peptide assignment difficult (Figure 3).
Consequently, this indicates that usable information can be
obtained from peptides that map to more than one transcript in
the same gene only if information on transcript abundance is
considered. Taken together, these results suggest that transcript
expression levels play a dominant role in regulating protein abun-
dance, which supports the idea that differential splicing events
in minor transcripts correspond to subtle changes that do not
have a strong impact on the overall proteome, whatever their
functional outcome.
Validation Using Selective Reaction Monitoring Mass
Spectrometry
To validate our findings using a more sensitive mass spectro-
metric approach, we performed selective reaction monitoring
(SRM) on control siRNA-treated and PRPF8-depleted samples
(Figures S3A and S3B). To increase the quantitative precision,
we spiked heavy isotope-labeled peptide standards for SRM
measurement into the sample. SRM has a higher sensitivity but
a much lower analyte throughput than SWATH; hence, we were
only able to determine peptide fold change information for 53 tar-
geted peptides corresponding to 15 genes whose major tran-
scripts display DTU. Comparing mRNA fold changes with protein
expression using this dataset yields a Spearman’s correlation
coefficient of 0.62 and a Pearson correlation coefficient of 0.59
(p value = 0.0116, Spearman; p value = 0.01663, Pearson; corre-
lation test) (Figure 4B; Table S1). When considering only peptides
that map uniquely to transcripts involved in DTU events, we
observe an increased correlation coefficient of 0.78 (0.71 for
Pearson) (35 peptides from 13 genes; p value = 0.0017,
Spearman; p value = 0.0043, Pearson; correlation test) (Figure 4A;
Table S1) and 0.73 (0.70 for Pearson) when focusing on major
transcripts and uniquely mapping peptides (33 peptides from
12 genes; p value = 0.0063, Spearman; p value = 0.00794,
Pearson; correlation test) (Figure S3C; Table S1). Collectively,
our findings demonstrate that changes in isoform usage across
the human transcriptome manifest at the proteome level.
Biological Impact of Functional mRNA Isoforms through
Proteome Diversity
Alternative splicing has the potential to vastly increase the
diversity of proteins encoded by the human genome. To assess
Figure 2. Changes in Isoform Usage Manifest Themselves at the Proteome Level
(A) Uniquely mapping peptides and SWATH-MS. Schematic indicating peptide to transcript mapping for uniquely mapping peptides is shown on left. Scatterplot
comparing changes in expression of differently used transcripts (DTU) (log2 fold change RNA-seq) to changes in expression of the peptides that uniquely map to
them (log2 fold change SWATH-MS) after PRPF8 depletion is shown on right. Spearman and Pearson correlation coefficients and associated p values are shown
in top left corner.
(B) Major transcripts and SWATH-MS. Schematic indicating peptide to transcript mapping for major transcripts is shown on left. Similar scatterplot is shown on
right for transcripts whose most highly expressed isoform (major transcript) changes in expression after PRPF8 depletion with corresponding peptide evidence.
(C) Use of an alternative integration strategy for peptide assignment where information about transcript expression levels was not considered increases dataset
size but reduces correlation coefficient. Specifically, if a peptide maps to multiple transcripts in the same gene, but the expression of only one of these transcripts
was changed after PRPF8 depletion, then this peptide was assigned to that particular transcript regardless of its expression level. In contrast, peptides that map
simultaneously to multiple differentially used transcripts were considered ambiguous and were not used for further analysis. A scatterplot comparing changes in
expression of differently used transcripts (DTU) (log2 fold change RNA-seq) to changes in expression of their corresponding peptides (log2 fold change SWATH-
MS) after PRPF8 depletion is shown.

Page 1234:
See image 2, Figure 3

Page 1235:
A B
Figure 4. Validation Using Selective Reaction Monitoring Mass Spectrometry (SRM)
(A) Uniquely mapping peptides and SRM. Scatterplot comparing changes in expression of differently used transcripts (DTU) (log2 fold change RNA-seq) to
changes in expression of the peptides that uniquely map to them (log2 fold change SRM-MS) after PRPF8 depletion. Peptide expression information was obtained
using SRM.
(B) Major transcripts and SRM. Similar scatterplot is shown for transcripts whose most highly expressed isoform (major transcript) changes in expression after
PRPF8 depletion with corresponding peptide evidence.
See also Figure S3C and Table S2.
whether the changes in alternative splicing that we observe at
the protein level may have a functional impact on cellular biology,
we focused on extreme examples of alternative splicing, where
the identity of major transcripts changes across conditions.
This is termed a switch event (Gonza ` lez-Porta et al., 2013) and
two examples that result in changes in protein isoform expres-
sion as determined by SWATH and SRM are shown in Figures 5
and S4 (LAP2 and hnRNPK). We focused on lamin-associated
polypeptide (LAP2), also known as thymopoietin, because its
various isoforms have been functionally characterized in detail
(Dechat et al., 1998; Somech et al., 2005). LAP2 undergoes a
switch event after PRPF8 depletion, whereby the dominant iso-
form changes from LAP2b to LAP2a, whose N-terminal region
of 187 amino acids (encoded by exons 1–3) is shared with
LAP2b (Figures 5A and S5A). Changes in protein expression of
each isoform, consistent with the change observed at the
mRNA level, were determined by SWATH-MS and validated by
SRM. Thus, one peptide shared by both isoforms did not change
in expression after PRPF8 depletion, whereas peptides uniquely
mapping to LAP2b decreased and those to LAP2a increased
respectively (Figures 5B and S5B). These changes were
confirmed at the RNA (Figure 5C) and protein (Figure 5D) levels
using probes and antibodies that recognize each specific
isoform.
Both isoforms have different cellular locations and functions:
LAP2b localizes to the nuclear lamina and represses transcrip-
tion of p53 and nuclear factor kB (NF-kB) target genes (Dechat
et al., 1998; Somech et al., 2005), while LAP2a is localized
throughout the nuclear interior and is implicated in the structural
organization of the nucleus (Dechat et al., 1998). In unperturbed
cells, the majority of LAP2 protein localizes to the nuclear lamina,
corresponding to the LAP2b isoform (Figure 5E). Following
PRPF8 depletion, this staining pattern is reversed: less LAP2
protein is observed at the nuclear lamina, and more is observed
in the nuclear interior, corresponding to increased levels of the
LAP2a isoform (Figure 5E). Consistent with a reduction in
LAP2b levels, we observe a de-repression of direct p53 and
NF-kB transcriptional targets after PRPF8 depletion (Figure S5C),
Figure 3. Peptides Encoded by Major Transcripts Are More Frequently Detected by SWATH-MS
(A) Expression levels (log10 FPKMs [fragments per kilobase of transcript per million mapped reads]) of major and minor transcripts with or without peptide ev-
idence are indicated for Control and PRPF8-depleted samples. Only uniquely mapping peptides were used for this analysis and one biological replicate for each
condition is shown.
(B) Lowly expressed major transcripts displaying DTU are not detectable as expressed protein product within dynamic range of SWATH mass spectrometry.
Expression levels (log10 FPKMs) for major transcripts displaying D

Page 1236:
See image 3, Figure 5

Page 1237:
A B Figure 6. Intron Retention and Differential
Gene Expression Functionally Tune the Hu-
man Proteome
(A) Intron retention reduces protein levels. Boxplot
representing the ratio of protein expression (PRPF8
depletion/Control) is shown for retained introns
(n = 270) and non-retained introns (n = 473) with
peptide evidence. p value is indicated (Wilcoxon
test).
(B) Alterations in gene expression alter protein
abundance proportionally to transcript levels. Scat-
terplot comparing changes in expression of differ-
entially expressed genes (DGE) (log2 fold change
RNA-seq) to changes in expression of the peptides
that map to them (log2 fold change SWATH-MS) after
PRPF8 depletion. Spearman’s correlation coeffi-
cient is shown in top left corner. Differently expressed
genes whose corresponding peptides change
significantly in expression (adjusted p value < 0.1,
t test, Holm method) are indicated in red and asso-
ciated correlation coefficient is also shown in red.
See also Figure S6 and Table S3.
highlighting the potential biological impact of functionally rele-
vant mRNA isoforms by the quantitative modulation of their
respective protein isoforms.
Intron Retention Reduces Protein Levels
Intron retention is a specific form of alternative splicing that is
increasingly regarded as a regulatory event that can control
gene expression (Kalyna et al., 2012; Wong et al., 2013; Yap
et al., 2012). We therefore assessed the impact of intron reten-
tion on the composition of the proteome. Recent findings have
suggested that intron retention affects transcripts from as
many as 75% of multi-exon genes (Braunschweig et al., 2014).
Transcripts with retained introns may not be translated because
they are retained in the nucleus as they are not competent for
export or may contain a premature termination codon (PTC)
that results in their degradation by the nonsense-mediated
decay (NMD) pathway. Consistent with this hypothesis, intron
retention leading to NMD has a significant impact on transcript
levels (Braunschweig et al., 2014). However, the effect of re-
tained introns on protein expression has not been examined to
date using a systematic approach covering the transcriptome.
Following PRPF8 depletion, we see an increase in the expression
levels of intronic reads throughout the genome (p value < 2.2 3
10 16) (Wickramasinghe et al., 2015). We obtained peptide evi-
dence for 270 genes that display retained introns (identified
using DEXSeq [Anders et al., 2012], see the Experimental Pro-
cedures) following PRPF8 depletion and asked whether protein
expression is downregulated in these genes compared to those
without intron retention. We find that the expression of their en-
coded proteins is reduced in comparison to those that do not
display retained introns (n = 473, p value = 0.0041, Wilcoxon
test) (Figure 6A). Furthermore, the proportion of downregulated
proteins is higher in the group of genes with retained introns
compared to those without intron retention (161/270 versus
231/473; p value = 0.0048, odds ratio: 1.547).
The relative abundance of protein-coding transcripts for each
gene also has a significant effect on protein expression. Indeed,
when considering genes with at least one transcript displaying a
retained intron biotype, the encoded proteins that are downregu-
lated after PRPF8 depletion have a higher relative abundance of
transcripts that are not protein-coding (i.e., display intron reten-
tion) for each gene in comparison to those whose proteins are
upregulated (p value = 0.0098) (Figure S6A). One example is
shown in Figures S4C and S4D, where the dominant protein-
coding isoform downregulated after PRPF8 depletion is re-
placed by an isoform with a retained intron, resulting in a
decrease in protein expression (according to 5 peptides de-
tected by SWATH-MS with average PRPF8 depletion/control
Figure 5. Biological Impact of Functional mRNA Isoforms
(A) Transcript representation of LAP2 isoforms and starplots of transcript relative abundance in control siRNA-treated and PRPF8-depleted cells. One biological
replicate is shown.
(B) LAP2 switch event with corresponding peptide evidence. Column plots show fold change in expression of transcripts (left two columns) and peptides (right
columns) after PRPF8 depletion. A negative fold change is represented in yellow (LAP2b), and a positive fold change in turquoise (LAP2a). Each peptide detected
by SWATH or SRM is shown individually, and the region of the transcript to which it maps is represented in (A) by different colored ovals.
(C and D) Changes in LAP2 isoform expression are confirmed at the RNA (C) and protein (D) levels using probes and antibodies that recognize each specific
isoform.
(E) LAP2 isoform localization is altered after PRPF8 depletion. Immunofluorescence of LAP2b and LAP2a isoforms is shown in control siRNA-treated and PRPF8-
depleted Cal51 cells using antibodies that recognize each specific isoform and both isoforms respectively (scale bar, 5 mm). Scanning analysis of LAP2 isoform
intensity is also shown with the scanning axes indicated by white lines. Pairs of nuclei of same scan width as determined by DAPI were used for scanning using
ImageJ (NIH). Experiments in (C)–(E)

Page 1238:
fold change of 0.575, p value = 0.018). Interestingly, for some
genes with intron retention after PRPF8 depletion, their corre-
sponding protein expression levels are unchanged or even
increased. This suggests a complex model whereby compensa-
tion mechanisms may be at play. However, the mere detection of
a transcript with a retained intron bio-type by RNA-seq may not
affect the levels of the protein encoded by that gene, unless it is
expressed at a robust level. Indeed, for those proteins that are
upregulated after PRPF8 depletion, the median protein coding
transcript relative abundance is >0.9 (Figure S6). In other words,
<10% of the transcripts that make up that gene display intron
retention, which may explain why these transcripts have no
effect on protein level. Collectively, these results suggest that
intron retention functionally tunes the human proteome as well
as the transcriptome.
Alterations in Gene Expression Alter Protein Abundance
Proportionally to Transcript Levels
Protein abundance is a direct determinant of cellular function
and is heavily influenced by transcript levels. However, the quan-
titative contribution of mRNA abundance to protein abundance
remains controversial (Cheng et al., 2016; Jovanovic et al.,
2015; Kristensen et al., 2013; Li et al., 2014; Liu et al., 2016; Ro-
bles et al., 2014; Schwanha ¨ usser et al., 2011; Vogel et al., 2010;
Vogel and Marcotte, 2012). Given that steady-state mRNA and
protein abundance are controlled by a number of post-transcrip-
tional and translational regulatory processes (Vogel and Mar-
cotte, 2012), establishing a correlation between the transcrip-
tome and the proteome is not straightforward. A number of
studies have used advances in next-generation sequencing
and proteomics to examine the correlation between mRNA and
protein abundances under steady-state conditions. Generally,
the results have indicated that although there is a strong correla-
tion between mRNA and protein abundance, a substantial pro-
portion of the variation in protein abundance cannot be attrib-
uted to mRNA expression alone (Fu et al., 2009; Ghazalpour
et al., 2011; Lundberg et al., 2010; Nagaraj et al., 2011; Schwan-
ha ¨ usser et al., 2011). This may be due to technical or experi-
mental noise, along with limitations of the timescale in the exper-
imental design and data modeling approaches (Liu et al., 2016).
In contrast, more recent studies using advanced technical mea-
surements in both steady-state and perturbed conditions have
suggested that changes in mRNA abundance play a dominant
role in determining the majority of dynamic changes in protein
levels (Jovanovic et al., 2015; Robles et al., 2014), although
this may depend on the respective contributions of mRNA and
protein level regulation to the biological system being studied
(Cheng et al., 2016).
We determined the contribution of changes in mRNA abun-
dance to protein abundance using our biological system of per-
turbed RNA splicing. We observe 2,021 genes that are differen-
tially expressed (DGE) after PRPF8 depletion and obtained fold
change information for 3,057 peptides corresponding to 572
genes that display DGE (Table S3). We observed a Spearman’s
correlation coefficient of 0.63 when comparing RNA and protein
fold changes in expression (Figure 6B; Table S3) that increases
to 0.79 when focusing on peptides with a significant fold change
(adjusted p value < 0.1, t test, Holm method) (Figure 6B; Table
1238 Cell Reports 20, 1229–1241, August 1, 2017
S3). A correlation coefficient of 0.58 (increasing to 0.76 when
considering peptides with significant fold change, adjusted
p value <0.1, t test, Holm method) is observed when focusing
on uniquely mapping peptides (Figure S6B). Importantly, when
we focus on the genes that do not display DGE, we observe a
correlation coefficient of 0.29 when comparing RNA and protein
fold changes in expression (Figures S6C and S6D), suggesting
that changes in gene expression are driving the changes in pro-
tein expression. Taken together, these results suggest that in a
system with perturbed alternative splicing, a significant propor-
tion of the variation in protein abundance can be chiefly attrib-
uted to changes in mRNA levels.
In summary, our results illustrate how RNA splicing links iso-
form expression in the human transcriptome with proteomic di-
versity. We further show that alternative splicing events causing
intron retention are accompanied by decreased protein abun-
dance, whereas alterations in differential transcript usage and
gene expression alter protein abundance proportionally to tran-
script levels. The fraction of the whole proteome mass of a hu-
man cell represented by the number of proteins identified in
our study is very high (>99.5%) (Beck et al., 2011), suggesting
that the observed events are likely to be representative for the
proteome.
Our integrative analysis using a perturbed system suggests
that alternative splicing events significantly contribute to both
proteomic composition and diversity in humans. While a recent
study that used ribosome occupancy as an indicator of transla-
tion output and not protein levels, supports our conclusions
(Weatheritt et al., 2016), the contribution of alternative splicing
to proteomic complexity remains divisive (Blencowe, 2017;
Tress et al., 2017a, 2017b). The increase in correlation coefficient
between mRNA and protein levels that we observe from SWATH
to SRM suggests that a significant proportion of the protein vari-
ance from our perturbed system can be explained by differences
in isoform usage. Critically, this depends on both the sensitivity
of the mass spectrometric method used and the identification
of high confidence alternative splicing events at the transcript
level.
The methods we have developed to integrate RNA-seq and
quantitative SWATH and SRM mass spectrometry data to study
splicing demonstrate that usable information can be obtained
from peptides that map to more than one transcript in the
same gene once information on transcript abundance is consid-
ered. They provide a foundation for future studies to examine the
proteome-wide effects of altered RNA splicing associated with
human diseases (Kurtovic-Kozaric et al., 2015; Quesada et al.,
2011; Tanackovic et al., 2011; Yoshida et al., 2011).
EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES
Analysis of RNA-Seq Data
The transcriptome of control siRNA-treated and PRPF8-depleted Cal51 cells
was sequenced on an Illumina HiSeq2000 platform using 100 bp paired-end
reads with poly(A)+RNA isolated from 3 and 4 independent experiments,
respectively, as previously described (Wickramasinghe et al., 2015). Raw
reads were directly mapped to the transcriptome with Bowtie v0.12.7 (Lang-
mead et al., 2009), using Ensembl v66 as a reference (Flicek et al., 2012).
Following the estimation of transcript expression levels with MMSEQ v1.0.7
(Turro et al., 2011), its companion tool MMDIFF (Turro et al., 2014) was used

Page 1239 (technical informatioin):
to identify both differentially expressed genes and differentially used
transcripts as described in more detail in the Supplemental Experimental
Procedures.
Protein Extraction and In-Solution Digestion
The cell pellets from three independent depletion experiments (control siRNA
and PRPF8-depleted) were lysed on ice by using a lysis buffer containing 8 M
urea (EuroBio), 40 mM Tris-base (Sigma-Aldrich), 10 mM DTT (AppliChem),
and complete protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche) as described in more detail
in the Supplemental Experimental Procedures.
Shotgun and SWATH-MS Measurement
The peptides digested from Cal51 lysate were all measured on an AB Sciex
5600 TripleTOF mass spectrometer operated in DDA mode. The same liquid
chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) system used for
DDA measurements was also used for SWATH analysis (Collins et al., 2013;
Gillet et al., 2012; Liu et al., 2013) and is described in more detail in the Supple-
mental Experimental Procedures.
Assignment of Peptides to Transcripts
An initial set of 16,779 peptides was detected across biological replicates
for each condition (control siRNA and PRPF8-depleted samples) using
SWATH-MS and mapped against all the protein coding transcripts annotated
in Ensembl v66, including those with a nonsense-mediated decay biotype.
Removal of peptides that mapped to more than one gene led to a set of
14,695 peptides (corresponding to 2,805 genes), which was used for down-
stream analysis. Peptides were assigned to specific transcripts as outlined
in Figure 1. Peptides that map uniquely to each transcript represented a minor-
ity of events (2,974 peptides mapping to 859 genes). Peptides that map ubiq-
uitously to several transcripts of the same gene were assigned based on
knowledge from the RNA-seq experiments using the following criteria. Two
alternative peptide assignment strategies were considered. One strategy
incorporated information on transcript isoform abundance for each gene into
our analysis, whereby only peptides that map to major transcripts were
considered. Major transcripts are the dominant expressed isoform for each
gene and those identified as major in either control siRNA-treated or PRPF8-
depleted samples were used specifically for peptide assignment. Additionally,
we considered an alternative assignment strategy where information about
transcript expression levels was not considered. Specifically, if a peptide
maps to multiple transcripts in the same gene, but the expression of only
one of these transcripts was changed after PRPF8 depletion, then this peptide
was assigned to that particular transcript regardless of its expression level. In
contrast, peptides that map simultaneously to multiple differentially used tran-
scripts were considered ambiguous and were not used for further analysis.
Integration of Transcriptomic and Proteomic Data
To integrate transcriptomic and proteomic data, fold changes in transcript
and peptide expression after PRPF8 depletion were obtained from RNA-seq
and SWATH or SRM mass spectrometry experiments, respectively. RNA-
seq fold changes were calculated from the transcript-level expression esti-
mates obtained from MMSEQ as described above. For each transcript, the
fold change represents the median transcript expression in PRPF8-depleted
versus control siRNA-treated samples.
Raw peptide intensities were first quantile-normalized in order to enable
comparison across samples. For each peptide, the observed intensities
across the biological replicates in each condition were summarized by using
the median, and a fold change was obtained by dividing the value obtained
for PRPF8-depleted and control siRNA-treated samples. Peptide fold changes
for each transcript were calculated by first adding up the intensities of all
the peptides that mapped to that transcript in each given biological replicate
and then dividing the median value of the summed peptide signals for
PRPF8 depletion versus controls (hence resulting in one fold change per tran-
script). The same analysis was used for both SWATH and SRM datasets. Use
of an alternative strategy to determine peptide fold changes for each tran-
script, whereby the fold change for PRPF8 depletion versus controls was
determined individually for each peptide to obtain the median fold change of
all peptides that mapped to that transcript, yielded similar results (see Table
S2). The fold changes derived from these two technologies were integrated
as described in Figure 1. Spearman correlation was used to evaluate the rela-
tionship between transcript and peptide fold changes, as previously sug-
gested (Maier et al., 2009). We also used Pearson correlation as a comparison.
ACCESSION NUMBERS
The accession number for the raw data of mass spectrometry measurements
(SWATH-MS and shotgun) together with the input spectral library and
OpenSWATH results reported in this paper is ProteomeXchange Consortium
(http://proteomecentral.proteomexchange.org): PXD003278. The accession
number for the RNA sequencing data reported in this paper is ArrayExpress:
E-MTAB-3021.
SUPPLEMENTAL INFORMATION
Supplemental Information includes Supplemental Experimental Procedures,
six figures, and three tables and can be found with this article online at
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.celrep.2017.07.025.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
Y.L. performed all mass-spectrometry experiments and analyzed data with
M.G.-P. and V.O.W. M.G.-P. developed informatics pipelines and analyzed
data with S.S., Y.L., and V.O.W. J.C.M. contributed to the method develop-
ment, wrote the paper, and supervised M.G.-P. with A.B. A.R.V. and R.A. su-
pervised the study, analyzed data, and wrote the paper. V.O.W. conceived the
study, performed, and analyzed experiments, and wrote the paper.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank James Hadfield and members of the sequencing facility (Cambridge
Institute) for RNA sequencing. We gratefully acknowledge funding from the
EMBL (to M.G.-P. and J.C.M.), the NIH (U01CA152813 to Y.S.L. and R.A.), the
ERC (AdG-670821 [Proteomics 4D] to R.A.), the Swiss National Science Foun-
dation (31003A_166435 to R.A.), SystemsX.ch through project PhosphonetX-
PPM (to R.A.), the UK Medical Research Council (G1001521, G1001522, and
4050551988 to A.R.V.), and the NHMRC (1127745 to V.O.W.). V.O.W. is sup-
ported by an innovation fellowship from VESKI.
Received: April 21, 2017
Revised: June 2, 2017
Accepted: July 12, 2017
Published: August 1, 2017
REFERENCES
Anders, S., Reyes, A., and Huber, W. (2012). Detecting differential usage of
exons from RNA-seq data. Genome Res. 22, 2008–2017.
Beck, M., Schmidt, A., Malmstroem, J., Claassen, M., Ori, A., Szymborska, A.,
Herzog, F., Rinner, O., Ellenberg, J., and Aebersold, R. (2011). The quantitative
proteome of a human cell line. Mol. Syst. Biol. 7, 549.
Blakeley, P., Siepen, J.A., Lawless, C., and Hubbard, S.J. (2010). Investigating
protein isoforms via proteomics: a feasibility study. Proteomics 10, 1127–
1140.
Blencowe, B.J. (2017). The relationship between alternative splicing and pro-
teomic complexity. Trends Biochem. Sci. 42, 407–408.
Braunschweig, U., Barbosa-Morais, N.L., Pan, Q., Nachman, E.N., Alipanahi,
B., Gonatopoulos-Pournatzis, T., Frey, B., Irimia, M., and Blencowe, B.J.
(2014). Widespread intron retention in mammals functionally tunes transcrip-
tomes. Genome Res. 24, 1774–1786.
Brosch, M., Saunders, G.I., Frankish, A., Collins, M.O., Yu, L., Wright, J., Ver-
straten, R., Adams, D.J., Harrow, J., Choudhary, J.S., and Hubbard, T. (2011).
Shotgun proteomics aids discovery of novel protein-coding genes, alternative



The images are in the root folder